twenty years after James Earl Ray was
convicted mr. pepper sets out to clear
him detailing a case that accuses the
FBI the CIA the US military the Memphis
Police and local and national organized
crime leaders this talk from a current
affairs bookstore in San Diego is an
hour ten minutes our speaker this
evening is an English barrister and an
American lawyer who practices
international human rights law from
London he has represented governments
and heads of states and appears as an
expert on international law issues a
close friend of dr. Martin Luther King
he also remains to this day a close
friend of the King family he convenes a
seminar on international human rights in
Oxford England so here this evening to
talk about his book an act of state the
execution of Martin Luther King were
very pleased to introduce mr. William
pepper
good evening thank you for coming and
tearing ourselves away from the State of
Union address so much deja vu let me try
to set the tone this all of this work of
mine started really with Vietnam and
Martin Kings relationship and
Association we meet in the last year of
his life was triggered by Vietnam land
and we try to just set the tone for the
passion that he felt about that war
because it's I think very appropriate
today there was a there was a a poem
that moved him very much and very deeply
and some of you may know it it starts
off I come and stand at every door but
no one hears my silent tread I knock and
yet remain unseen for I am dead I am
dead I was only seven when I died in
Hiroshima long ago when children died I
was seven then as I am now when children
die they do not grow my hair was
scorched by swirling flame my eyes grew
dim my eyes grew blind death came and
turned my bones to dust and I was
scattered by the wind all that I ask is
but for peace you fight today you fight
today so that the children of this world
might live and grow and laugh and play
now when I came back I was a freelance
journalist as really as a kid in in
Vietnam and I came back never published
anything when I was there had to leave
because of where I chose to spend my
time when I was in that country and
became
of a security risk in some ways I
suppose and a piece a piece called the
children of Vietnam was included in a
magazine called ramparts some of you may
recall the old progressive mac ramparts
magazine that was published by Warren
Hinkle in San Francisco on January 1967
that came out and during that month
Martin King was on his way to the West
Indies and he was sitting at the airport
in Atlanta with Bernard Lee and his
bodyguard and going through his mail and
in that mail was a copy of ramparts
magazine and his his food was waiting to
be eaten in front of him and he starts
scanning through the magazine and it was
was the photographs that stopped him I
took many photographs when I was when I
was there of burned children and
shrapnel eyes civilians particularly
women and when he saw the photographs
Bernard said he pushed his food away and
said they gave it vague sigh and burn
answer what's wrong Martin the food is
not good you're not hungry he said I can
never be hungry again he said I just
can't Bernard
until I do something about this war this
war must end he had of course been
opposing it instinctively for a long
time but he now consolidated that
opposition he asked to meet with me and
for the for the times every times that
we met he asked to see other photographs
files notes I'd taken and I shared them
with him and I remember on the way to to
Cambridge from Providence Rhode Island
where he delivered a sermon and Brown
Chapel we wrote to Cambridge where
Vietnam summer was going to be opened
that was one of the anti-war movements
of organizations up at Harvard and I was
going through material with him in the
car in the way and he it was too much
he just openly wept and I'd become
hardened by it because I had been
amongst it for a period of time and I
and but to him he never he never could
accept it and he became very emotional
about this thing so then he delivered
his speech on the 4th of April 1967 at
Riverside Church and before he did that
he said to me he said to me bill will
you come down to Ebenezer and will you
take the pulpit and will you speak to my
people I thought he'd gone round the bed
and I said what's ready what do you got
you want a hunky from the north to come
down talk to your people he says yes you
must come down and talk to those is why
this is silly
they're your people Martin you talk to
them you've always talked to them and he
waved his finger and I forget he waved
his finger in front of Isis no he said
no you've been there you've seen it you
must tell them what I have to do and
they'll listen to you and that brought
loss of words to me and I so I went to
Eman even spoke to them and explained
why I respectfully thought their pastor
had to oppose this war which he then did
and the last year of his life I was the
only year that I knew him we work
closely together because he was willing
to take every opportunity to to organize
and to encourage the end of the war so
it was thought it was planned to have a
National Conference for new politics was
an umbrella organization he asked me to
lead it and become its director and it
was to bring together from all over the
country people who were committed to
peace and justice it was a grassroots
movement but it stretched across the
socio-economic range of American society
there were 5000 delegates that
eventually came to the Palmer House in
Chicago on Labor Day 1967 the goal
Oh politically to produce a king Spock
ticket as an alternative to the Johnson
administration's reelection and we were
so naive in those days
Martin keynoted the convention and as he
was speaking a note was passed to me and
I looked at this note and it said get
him out of here
as soon as he finishes speaking or we
will take him hostage and humiliate him
before the world that note came from a
black caucus which had been formed and
put together before the convention but
greeted each member of the black
community and black delegations that
came in and took them into a separate
headquarters in a separate room and so
there was a tight unified black caucus
and that note came from the black caucus
we didn't know at the time of course
that the black that black caucus had
been consisted of the leadership of Jean
provocateur who were in the pay of the
government of the United States and in
the poverty program Richard Daley in
Chicago and included members of the
Blackstone Rangers gangs in Chicago and
that the whole idea was to come to this
convention and break it up and defeat it
and so what they what they did was to
introduce the most extreme resolutions
possible and it had the effect of
driving away all the funding for that
new politics movement so
it was basically over before it began
that that great political movement and
and was fragmented although it limped
along for the course of the year but as
a political movement had ended now when
Martin was killed on April 4 1968 I went
to the memorial Ben Spock and I went
together to the memorial and then to the
funeral funeral service in Atlanta and
Ben and Julian Bond and some others I
think went up to Bobby Kennedy suite and
Bobby had invited me to to come up
because he of course had declared for
the presidency and was even flirting
with the idea that Martin King might be
a roomie a running late for him I didn't
go to Bobby Kennedy suite I'd known him
some years earlier when I was an even
younger person and I and didn't like him
I actually handled a campaign of his I
was his citizens chairman in one of New
York state's counties and I regret I
didn't go now because Bob Kennedy in
between 1964 and 68 I think was a very
different person I think he grew in
enormous ways so I couldn't I had had it
with with political activity in life and
so I just walked away did a number of
other things ten years later
Ralph Abernathy said to me out of the
blue I want to go and see James Earl Ray
I want you to interrogate him and I want
to watch him and listen to his answers
because I have some questions about
James Earl Ray's guilt
I said Ralph it's ten years later
with you hat why do you have these
questions now and and what has developed
I never got a satisfactory answer for
that just do it for me will you build so
I know thinking about the case I said I
know I had assumed they always had the
right man
and never gave it a second thought as
you know and just turned my back and
then it but it's something if you were
Hosea needed an extra body at a
demonstration or a March or something
I'm happy that was happy to to come
along and help but that was the extent
of it took several months for me to get
it caught up to speed on the information
about the case and the history of it and
the facts and I did a lot of reefa so we
did go five six months later it was in
August 78 Roger that all ggest 1978
first time I saw James alright Ralph
Abernathy in a body language specialist
from Harvard was the psychiatrist who
sat in the corner and just watched James
every move as I put him through a rather
rigorous interrogation and of course his
lawyer at that time was Mark Lane and
Mark was presence at off to the side
didn't intervene at all well we came
away from that five-hour session
Abernathy and I with a distinct belief
that this man was not the shooter we
didn't know what other role he might
have played in the killing and we didn't
know how what is what it whether he was
a he whether he was used as a patsy or
whether he was a willing conspirator
didn't didn't have a sense of that but
we had the feeling distinct that he was
not the shooter it came from it was
visceral but it also was factual and he
was very different you know he was very
different from the man we had read about
and we had heard about he was not
aggressive he was not brutish he wasn't
didn't have didn't appear to have any
traces of overt racism in fact he was
docile he was quiet
spoken he was even shy a very different
kind of person than we had expected but
he raised so many questions in my mind
about
the official story and his own guilty
plea scenario that I decided I would
start to look into this and see what was
possible find out what I could so I
started going into Memphis from time to
time and hanging out in South Main
Street in the area of the Lorraine Motel
and going over into the black sections
of South Memphis and talking to
witnesses meeting people and trying to
get a sense of the answers to questions
that had not been properly asked or
answered and the whole range of them
like the whole issue of the bushes
behind Jim's grill where Marvin Jim's
grill was a cafe that backed onto the
Mulberry Street and the Lorraine Motel
was there right behind it and supposedly
bushes were cut down and in the morning
afterward why were those bushes cut down
the whole series of whole series of
questions about that
like like that that arose so I started
this investigation and it became a
slippery slope because the deeper I got
into it the more questions I found and I
couldn't answer so I kept going and
going and I kept going back to see see
James Earl Ray and I kept asking him to
clarify to to answer new issues that
that I had found questions and James
tried always the best of his ability he
kept asking me to represent him well I
refused to do that for 10 years between
78 and 88 I refused to represent James
because I said to him very frankly until
I'm convinced that you were totally an
unknowing Patsy and not a knowing
conspirator I'm not going to represent
you logistically I had problems doing
this time because I was living in
England I was at Cambridge living in
Cambridge for 21 20 years I had gone to
England and so I had to keep coming back
and forth I I raised three children at
Cambridge
and now then they were very tiny which
was actually one of the reasons I left
but we I I made this trip over a period
of the ten years and finally got enough
information to convince myself that this
man was an unknowing Patsy that he had
been used Hiba nipple aided and
controlled
he'd been set up and so finally 1988 I
agreed to represent James over and I
represented him for the last ten years
of his life he died in prison in 1998
and we tried to get him a trial for all
of the period of time and failed took
his case to the Supreme Court and we we
finally would turn down there only 3
years after I came on to represent him
and then the idea of a television trial
came up and so in 1992 Thames television
in England and HBO here in the United
States sponsored a trial the trial of
James Earl Ray and the judge was Marvin
Frankel
old tough old former federal judge
prosecutor was Hickman Ewing jr. name
may ring a bell with you because he was
ken starr's number 2 for period of time
on the Whitewater investigation and he's
a former US Attorney
so Hickman prosecuted I defended and we
went at it I strictly under Tennessee
Criminal Code and hearing strictly to
that code jury came from all over the
country and so it wasn't a local jury
and they and we screened them we went
through the usual exclusion process took
the jury seven hours after 10 days of
trial took them seven hours to find
James Earl Ray not guilty with a
fraction of the evidence that was to
emerge over the last ten years so
probably never heard about that a few of
you may have heard about it because it
was never reported it was never covered
the media never treated that in any way
at all as a news story it was regarded
as entertainment and even then that was
not I was not covered and this has been
the history of this case and that's in
the investigation and the results is
that there is an embargo in the United
States with respect to this story the
book the first book written in 1995
orders to kill was never reviewed in
America this book will not be reviewed
in America so when it comes to those
kinds of national security issues very
sensitive issues it's very difficult to
get the story out in the mainstream
after the trial the television trial
witnesses started to come forward pieces
other pieces started to be planned put
in place a man called Loyd Jowers was
suddenly cast into the frame he was the
manager of Jim's grill I had found four
witnesses finally independently who
implicated jours in the killing of
Martin Luther King Towers knew about
this and decided he was going to be
indicted and asked his lawyer to go and
get him immunity from prosecution and he
would then tell everything
so his lawyer goes trotting over to the
district attorney general's office and
says you know I represent mr. Lloyd ours
and he's very much involved in the
assassination of Martin Luther King but
he knows everything that happened around
his premises where it was planned and
who was involved locally and he's
prepared to give you all that
information but only needs his immunity
well not only did ours not get immunity
from prosecution but he was never
interviewed by the district attorney
general
showers were still frightened so he
tried to push the envelope a little bit
and he was able to appear on an ABC
program called primetime lives run by a
fella called Sam Donaldson who was a
peculiarly independent guy in terms of
that program showers told his story
about how he was approached by a local
produce man named Frank Liberto was a
member of the marchello family marchello
family organization he worked for them
he was one of their one of their guys
their lieutenants in Memphis and Liberto
offered him $100,000 and called in a big
new bill he had a big debt I later found
out what that debt was and in exchange
for that showers was going to do
everything he was told he was going to
allow his facilities to be used for the
planning the staging of the
assassination of Martin Luther King and
showers agreed and he went along with it
and he covered his his whole role and
eventually of course Loyd Jowers has
told everything to dexter king and
myself to Andrew Young and Dexter King
separately and he admitted the scope of
his involvement in this conspiracy so we
now had the marchello organization
pretty clearly in the frame and it was
looking like a contract killing contract
killing carried out by a Memphis Police
Department officer who was paid to do it
so we moved beyond a hours to reach out
to other witnesses who came forward and
one of them told us about living in
Houston Texas and knowing a fellow
called Raoul and becoming friendly with
Raoul and his cousin Armando and going
to the docks in Houston and taking boxes
of weapons and helping transport them to
a house where they were repackaged and
apparently sent into South America
for a profit-making operation and she
didn't know where the weapons came from
or anything but she knew about this
operation and she told them Horror Story
one time she said she was at the house
where she was unloading these weapons
and she put her keychain on the on the
kitchen table where they were around
where they they were sitting and one of
the guys picked it up and looked at it I
had the photographs in the little
plastic circle of John Kennedy Robert
Kennedy and Martin Luther King and he
looked at this and he threw it to Raul
Raul grabbed it looked at it and became
she said totally and furious threw it on
the floor jumped up stamped on it and
said that I killed that [ __ ] once looks
as though I'm going to have to do it
again pulled out a gun
and grabbed Glenda who had known this
man for quite a period of time and took
her into a bedroom off the kitchen and
raped her and she was totally frightened
appalled and didn't know what this was
all about but it obviously led her to
believe quite clearly that this man had
some involved in the killing of Martin
King and she set this whole story yeah
she didn't tell anybody about this for
many years you have to understand one of
the the reasons that this case has now
come to the point where it's effectively
solved is that somehow people have
become willing to come forward after
many years and talk the first witness to
implicate Loyd Jowers betty spades knew
what happened in 1968 and didn't tell it
to me until 1992 and I had known Betty
since 1978 though Lloyd had tried to
keep me away from her which made me more
and more suspicious but what actually
happened with Betty was she had an
affair with Lloyd and she had tried to
keep an eye on him
and she thought that Thursday afternoon
that when he wasn't in the grille that
maybe he was out fooling around and the
bushes was one of the the the ladies of
the night who used to hang out there
around the motel because the motel in
those days was also a we call a hot
sheet place I suppose it was used for
for those kinds of Italian sirs so she
said well I didn't see him so I decided
I was going to go look and and and find
him and and she found the door to the
kitchen closed which was unusual and
then she found the back door open which
was also unusual and as she got to the
back door and started to look out just
before she looked out she heard a shot
and then as she looked out she saw Lloyd
coming running straight from the bushes
toward her carrying a still smoking
rifle he brushed pastor came inside
broke it down and as he broke it down he
looked at her and he said you wouldn't
ever do anything to hurt me would you
and she says no Lloyd you know of course
I would know he didn't hurt you is it
good and then he took the shell and
threw it into the the commode the toilet
in the back off the kitchen there I
tried to flush it it stopped up the
toilet gave him a problem and he had to
deal with Ben he took the gun that out
and put it under the counter where it
remained well betty was terrified she
she kept this to herself because she
knew Lloyd she believed Lloyd killed
Martin Luther King she didn't know he'd
taken the gun from the shooter she
thought he had actually done it so she
kept this to herself
all those years afraid and once she said
he did send someone to try to kill her
but it was more likely was just going to
intimidate her not been on to kill her
so
it's taken a long time for much of this
evidence to come out after the
television trial there appeared in the
Memphis commercial appeal an article
long article by a writer named Steve
Tompkins Steve had spent a year and a
half researching the infiltration
surveillance and monitoring of black
civil rights leaders and black community
activists and black community leaders he
spent a year and a half
investigating the infiltration and the
monitoring of these leaders by army
intelligence and he came to learn that
this was a program there was a program
of surveillance of particularly black
leaders after the second and second end
of the second decade the 20th century
because of the fear that the Russian
Revolution was going to come to American
soil and its prime recruiting warriors
might well be discontented black
minority citizens so they kept them the
leaders under surveillance for a long
time so the quantal Pro in the in the
60s 50s and 60s is something that's not
nothing not unusual has historical
precedent in the course of that whole
article which dealt then with with
modern surveillance of King and the
wiretapping and all of that whose
movements there was a tiny little
paragraph that said and in Memphis
Tennessee on the 4th of April 1968 there
was an alpha 184 team a six-man alpha
184 team and he said and no one has ever
explained what that team was doing there
so I went to see Steven this for the
first time I had ever heard of any
possible involvement of anyone other
than the Mafia in terms of the killing
of King so I went to see Steve and I
asked him to help me cause James was in
prison we won't try to get my tralala
and he refused he said no these are very
bad people
worst 18 months of my life I don't
anything to do with it and I just kept
going back to him kept being but
persistent finally said yes
CAIR I will I'll help you
and then for quite a period of time that
the arrangement was I would give him
questions he knew nothing about the
assassination the details of it I'd give
him questions and he would go to two of
his contacts were members of that team
give them the questions they agreed they
would answer them and he would bring
them back and we went on this work they
would never meet with me because I was
James's lawyer and they lived in Mexico
they had fled in the 70s because they
thought a clean-up operation was on so
Steve made these trips all the time and
a picture started to emerge which
indicated that there was an official
involvement although the killing was in
fact a mafia contract killing that there
was an official involvement there was
coordination and there were two
photographers on the roof of the fire
station which was a diagonally crossed
the street from the Lorraine who
photographed everything so we now
learned that there are photographs of
the assassination of Martin King
including a photograph the assassin and
we made again through Steve contact with
both photographers one lives in Costa
Rica and eventually we mean a goat try
to negotiate the acquisition of those
photographs and eventually they broke
down because at one point there was a
security breach and Steve was followed
on to a critical meeting and by two FBI
agents of a local field office in Miami
and they one of them stuck a long lens
out the passenger side of the car and
just spooked the photographer who took
off and that ended those negotiations we
we did file a Freedom of Information Act
suit or colleagues are minded and was
denied that the photographs ever existed
so
yeah this kind of evidence began to pile
up and in 1995 I published where we were
in terms of the the state of the
information at that point in time and in
in a book called orders to kill this
work act of state is the end of the
story in terms of the assassination of
Martin King so far as we are concerned
in 1999 we tried a civil case against
Loyd Jowers and other conspirators known
and unknown you've probably never heard
of that trial either that trial took
place because the King family decided
around 96 after carefully considering it
and being somewhat aware of my work over
the years that it was time to try to get
a trial for James Earl Ray because he
was he was dying of liver disease and so
the King family came out in favor of a
drop of gems and there was a fair amount
of publicity about that that people
probably know that and that failed
because James died we could have kept
him alive I had negotiated a liver
transplant position for him at the
University of Pittsburgh and I put in an
application to the court to allow him to
be transferred transported to the
University of Pittsburgh where the
operation would take place he qualified
he at all he met all of their criteria
and we offered to pay all the expenses
of course and we were denied permission
he was denied the liver transplant that
he needed to live so he died in 1998 and
I guess we figured well this is the end
of the road isn't it what are we what do
we do now and I met with the family and
at length and I said there is they said
we have any options is there's only one
option and that is we could sue loads
hours we have enough evidence to get a
lawsuit going against him and to bring
him to court and sue him on
on a civil case wrongful law wrongful
death charge so we did that we filed it
and about a year after filing in 98 it's
a year after filing the case came up and
it came up before the judge that we
wanted it to come before a man called
Swearengen a black judge one of the few
independent judges in that judicial
system who was going to retire shortly
in fact this became his last case so
judge Swearengen heard the case we
started to try it on a November 10th I
guess it was we tried this case for 30
days 70 witnesses proceeded to that to
testify under oath 70 witnesses over 30
days and it took a jury 59 minutes to
find for the King family against Loyd
Jowers and other conspirators known and
unknown and the whole all of the
evidence gathered finally under oath is
on the good website of the King Center
the King Center calms 4,000 pages of
testimony and so there is that
historical record which what doesn't do
James any good but at least it laid out
the the whole scenario of the case and
it and it dealt with all of the nuances
all of the evidence which is maybe too
much to go into here but we can talk I
can answer questions if you want but it
included evidence of two eyewitnesses
who saw James Earl Ray driving away from
the scene 20 minutes before the killing
as he always had said he done evidence
about the weapon which was not the
Throwdown gun which was not the weapon
evidence about the existence of Raoul
Raoul exists he's alive and well and
four different independent verification
of Raoul from a photograph that a inside
intelligence agent
kindly provided quietly to me and this
was a photograph at James Earl Ray saw
1978 and a 10
find in 1978 then there were two
newspaper articles I said James Earl Ray
has identified Easter finally after
seeing hundreds has identified a
photograph of the man he claims
controlled him Raoul well on the back of
that photograph was a name this had been
sent an ominously anonymously to James
and there was a name on the back of the
photograph and the name was the name of
someone else
so obviously this in 78 was the time of
the select committee hearings the
congressional hearings what they hoped
would happen was James would see this
photographs yes say that's Raul and look
on the bottom and this is his real name
and then have a press conference and
announced that and of course then they
blow him out of the water his
credibility would be gone but he didn't
do that he didn't take the name he just
said this is the photograph and so I
showed it to him when I showed it to him
in 95 96 he said yes that's the same one
and identified then this is Raul English
merchant seaman identified him as being
in the same bar up in Montreal where
James said he always said he met him so
one after another his own daughter when
confronted at the door with the
photograph said well anybody could get
that photograph of my father so she
identified the photograph of her father
Glenda Grabow identified this is the man
who raped her not only that she called
him on the telephone and spoke with him
for nine minutes and we talked about old
times
so he's alive and well but when he knew
we were on to him all of a sudden
government agents appeared at his house
and a Portuguese reporter interviewed
his wife was amazed to find her saying
this has been hell for us but you know
the government the United States has
been so kind and so good they send these
people and would tell us how to answer
questions they might they tap our phones
they they've done such wonderful things
we thought this is a retired assembly
line automobile worker all right and why
would he why would the government be
doing all these things for this man
so I mean the the evidence Mountain goes
on and on and it's some the cases is
pretty clear the facts are pretty clear
at this point Memphis Police Department
officers who are involved we're pretty
clear it's also pretty clear that no one
wants to prosecute and has ever wanted
to prosecute and that the official story
it's been defended by publicist forever
and the Attorney General of the United
States did a report following the trial
which again confirmed the the official
story the family wanted a Truth and
Reconciliation Commission clintus the
president clinton turned it over to his
attorney general and the story has has
maintained itself
ever since but i think for me one of the
most important aspects of this book
orders to kill is not this the solution
to the murder of Martin Luther King and
who killed him it's one the lessons that
we can draw from this type of government
activity against a man who became
intolerable and he was intolerable not
only because he opposed the war in
Vietnam but more because he was going to
bring a half-million of the most
wretched of our citizens to Washington
to camp there to live there in a tent
city and go every day up the hill to see
their congressmen and their
representatives and try to get put back
into the budget social programs which
have been taken out and they were going
to go up and come back and go up and
come back and the the the forces the
security law enforcement intelligence
forces in the imposition in government
were convinced that Martin King would
lose control of that group that they
would become so angry as they became
rebuffed that they would become violent
and they would become a revolutionary
force and they didn't have enough troops
to put down that revolution Westmoreland
wanted 200,000 they couldn't give them
to him they didn't have the troops they
couldn't do it
so Martin King was never going to be
allowed to go to Memphis from Memphis to
Washington he was he was going to finish
there his room was changed from a lower
courtyard room to about exposed balcony
room he was well and truly set up and
virtually no security at all didn't
think about that in those days his rooms
were monitored and wired in the hotel as
with one on either side of him he was a
sitting duck and the story that came
back from these two officers was that
they were briefed at Camp Shelby
Mississippi at 4:30 in the morning of
April 4th they were shown two
photographs one of Martin King and one
of andrew young and these were the two
targets but the snipers and their
spotters had in their crosshairs at the
time the shot came from the bushes each
one thought the other did it when they
found out it was some what they call
wacko civilian later on they were they
were non-plus they didn't know what what
had what had happened they were they
really only a backup operation there
next morning early the brushes were cut
down deputy public works director
testified under oath yeah I was called
and I was asked to send a team in there
to help the police and it was a crime
scene so I knew sanitized it yeah well
they just told us what to do our people
just cut down all the bushes and cleaned
it's not know there were no traces of
anything anymore so well and truly
covered up has been this assassination
but it's important for Americans
understand
and not only America is because this
happens this happens throughout history
and throughout the world
but this is our country this is our time
and it's important to understand that
these things have happened and do
continue to happen and and will continue
to happen
perhaps unless there's an aware
citizenry to do something about it the
second most important aspect of this
work in my view is a chapter that deals
with the roots of Martin Luther King
because when you when you understand
where he came from and the kind of
person he was
you also understand what a great loss
this has been a loss that has been
irreplaceable for all of these years and
how he is missed and his real mentor
historically was not Gandhi Gandhi was
his tactical mentor in terms of
non-violence but his real mentor was
John Ruskin the Victorian British
political economist who was so committed
to the redistribution of wealth and the
provision of economic assistance to the
least well-off in any society that he
waged campaigns and everywhere he could
in England even though he was known as
the greatest art art historian an art
critic of his day Ruskin had this
enormous feeling for the poor and what
had to be done for a humane in a humane
society how they could not be neglected
so Martin's roots go back to Ruskin and
if we were we can take him further back
even into classical times he believed
that you know we should take this
neighborhood that we have built
technologically and now electronically
and we should make it into a brotherhood
but he didn't see us going that way he
saw us using a coated thorough or fee
sauce using unimproved means improved
means to reach unimproved ends and he
was horrified at the evil of war racism
and injustice and would not compromise
lost great sums of money and because of
this commitment the motto that I chosen
for the seminar I convened at Oxford
University is non nobis solum naughty
sumus which is a Latin phrase which says
we exist not for ourselves alone one of
Martin's favorite poets was John Donne
who wrote that famous poem no man is an
island and the least the least of any
person on earth who
is harmed or hurt is a harm injury to
myself that was the philosophy of Martin
King and he lived it to the end and he
was committed to the end to
accomplishing those goals and he died in
the process thank you I'm glad to answer
any questions that you have yes he was
tracing out James Earl Ray's brothers he
thought there'd be some evidence or
something there did you ever talk with
the brothers or know much about that's
that's story I know the brothers of
course well I don't know John no one I
mean John is a very erratic chap so I
don't I don't know he's been out of the
picture so I don't really know him but
course I've known Jerry ray for almost
all of the time yes and Jerry was always
very supportive of his brother
I'm very loving toward James and did
everything he could to help him but
Jerry knew very little when James
escaped from prison he made his way to
Canada he wasn't interested in staying
in the United States at all he was
trying to get out of North America and
that's where he was in Montreal when he
met Raoul who talked him into working
for him part-time but Jerry was I
believe kept very very largely in the
dark and of all of these things yeah yes
but anyway my question is what did what
did James Earl Ray think or what did
yeah he I'm sure had some ideas about
who actually did kill Martin Luther King
and and I would be curious to find out
what and who you think actually did it
who who dropped the dime and got the
Mafia involved I know the government
uses the Mafia and many many
circumstances you have any thoughts
about I'm sure you know well there are a
couple of there are a couple of
questions there absolutely well James in
that kind of situation the situation
which he was James would know only what
he needed to know in order to do what he
had to do and so as a result he was told
very little remember he was an escaped
convict on the run and he was in a
position where he could ask questions
this guy was feeding him money keeping
him going bought him a car so he would
be told what he was needed what he
needed to know nothing nothing like that
and and and he was he was moved around
and he did things okay so that and I'm
sure that happens in many many instances
right with respect to dropping the dime
or as you put it or who killed Martin
Luther King when the decision was taken
to kill King in my view the coordination
was put in the hands of a little-known
military intelligence group that is
housed in the bowels of the Pentagon and
that group under its under its Colonel
organized that effectively a task force
operation that group was also involved
in a joint venture with a marchello
organization
the guns were stolen that were sold were
stolen from our military bases in
Arsenal's and forts they were trucked
into Marcela's organization come around
to be taken off at Houston
the profits as I am was told were so
were split 50-50 so there was a joint
venture relationship between them but
more than that James Earl Ray's alias
was not an alias was an identity he was
given an actual identity of a man called
Eric Galt Eric Galt had high national
security clearance in the United States
he was the warehouse men at Union
Carbide plant in Canada outside of
Toronto the nine this military
intelligence group the Pentagon was
working with him on various operations
at the this very time James was given
this man's identity why would he be
given this man's identity well we can
only surmise that and probably because
if he was ever stopped and James is
clumsy and he made mistakes that's how
he ended up in prison he was often too
late for a robbery he was going to pull
my reading that the safe would be locked
let's say it was a time lock on the safe
Jeff will give you our money Jim said I
want your money well the safe is locked
this happened to Jack he would seem
ended up being late he was clumsy only
carried five bullets in his pistol he
once he admitted to me or with
embarrassment that he kept the firing
pin chamber empty because he shot
himself in the foot once so he said I
cannot do that there's no bullet yeah
and so when the prosecutor at the
television trial said to him what would
you do you say you couldn't kill anybody
you've never killed anybody
no if I used to shoot squirrels when I
was a kid with my father's 22 well you
couldn't kill anybody what would you do
if you came into my store and you
pointed a gun at me
and I pulled the gun flick and I pointed
my gun at you what would you do you
wouldn't shoot me he said I'd say let's
make a deal okay this is the nature of
this of this guy so
he was very much given that identity so
if he was ever stopped when they ran a
check on him he would they would be told
to let him go let him go well I I didn't
I've not gotten into any investigation
of any of the respects the nation's I
had my hands full with this one and a
man in prison yes can we hear some of
the details of the denial of the liver
transplant
well it was it was unprecedented it had
never been done he didn't have a right
under law the Commissioner the
Department of Corrections did not have
the statutory authority to allow it to
happen I mean there's a whole range of a
whole range of specious reasons that
that they used just like they took
charge Judge Joe Brown off the case on
the eve he was about to grant us a trial
they took Joe Brown off and did it
without allowing oral argument before
the court of appeal in Tennessee they
took him off just in the night that
decision was made yes
yes the FBI's role in the killing of
Martin Luther King was in my view to
cover it up and their role was the was
the cover-up they took control of the
investigation and basically perpetuated
the cover-up mr. Hoover sent one of his
personal agents best agents as a liaison
to senior military officer in the
intelligence wing and that man kept
going back and forth and back and forth
he effectively seconded this man and he
knew everything that was going on he was
not involved in the on-the-ground
details and the organization of those
details at all and my view but he then
controlled in the investigation but I
think he concurred and I think he
believed from the outset that the only
way that Martin King could be dealt with
effectively was to be killed and he said
that more than once to a friend of his
HL hunt an oil man and I had witnesses
who used to hunt administrative
assistant used to be present at a number
of those those meetings between Hoover
and hunt and hunt used to have a private
line phone in his desk just just to
Hoover and Hoover gave hunt his through
the director of security so they were
very close and hunt used to think what
we can stop king by my life line
programs he had a program they used to
broadcast and Hoover would give him
scurrilous material and Hunt would put
it out on the air you know and and so
Hunt thought this was gonna do it Hoover
said that's not going to do it we got to
take other other steps let me just go to
someone else yes
there's about this and and all that
you've realized about the state of mind
of our government whereas that left you
personally philosophically and what
lessons have you learned
well it's I've learned to be I've
learned to be cynical and skeptical I'm
a first-generation American my parents
emigrated here from Ireland and I grew
up as as a Kazakh as a kid believing
everything that one is taught in school
well the American Dream have a thing my
life was a little different in that when
I was 12 I was baseball player I mean I
played baseball the Columbia and I'm
cause if I was a ballplayer and
basketball and baseball and then but
when I was 12 I loved that game so much
that I wanted to play all summer and I
lived in a middle-class neighborhood and
the kids wouldn't play so anyway I could
play was I'd take my brown sandwich bag
and I go into crosstown on trolley car
into the ghetto and I I would play there
all day with with black kids so I had an
advantage that a lot of white
middle-class kids didn't have because I
began to see how people lived and I
began to wonder why they lived like this
yeah I remember seeing her be throw his
chute or rat they run across the living
room floor and I never seen a rat in a
living room before you know so I know
that was so I had I had I regard that as
an advantage not only for my skills as a
ballplayer but for my growth as as a
human being so I think you have to
become when you go through these kinds
of experience you have to become
skeptical and you have to question
everything and have no illusions about
power and I I now I'm very unhappy to
see the course that this Empire is
taking because it is an empirical force
and I see a lot of the same remember
Rome was a republic first yeah and its
went into empirical room and so we see a
lot of the same with a lot of the same
thing so I think citizens have to be
alert they have to more than anything
you have to teach your children teach
your children teach your children to
question because long after we're all
gone we know we must have them teach
their children and this otherwise this
oral tradition will will be useless yes
how do you feel about today's political
leaders representing the legacy of a
Martin Luther King political I'm sorry
how do you feel about today's leaders
representing the legacy of Warren King
well it's politically opportunistic
isn't it I mean it's it's useful for
them to do it anyone who can ride on the
legacy bandwagon of Martin King is going
to do it people who hated him and
disdain for him when he was alive civil
rights leaders you know walked away from
him when he was alive he called me Ray
late at night after a Riverside speech
and said you know they're all gone now
they've all told me not to do this all
my brothers my friends were tormented so
we got to build this new team because
they're all gone this is not the thing
to do to attack this this government so
you know I almost became ill one time
when we were arguing and a parole
hearing for James and the prosecutor
District Attorney General attended and
he went on about how much this nation
but lost Martin King was killed you know
and I knew the man's roots and but
that's what politicians and political
figures do isn't it that's what we have
to learn to understand yes as a close
friend of dr. King what do you think if
he was around today his involvement if
any would be with the current anti-war
movement against the war in Iraq and
what do you expect that he'd say to us
as citizens what are
judi should be as Americans well I don't
have any doubt if he were around today
he would be very much active in the
leadership against the Iraqi adventure
and he would work in every way he
possibly could you know to to stop that
war or to prevent it from happening or
to preempt it or discontinue it once it
started because he would know what the
results will be and we all should know
what the results will be we're going to
once again witness the slaughter of
thousands upon thousands of innocents
before there is ever any military
engagement
there will be an engagement of our
military with the civilians of the of
Iraq once more an ancient and ancient
civilization irrespective of its
leadership and ancient civilization and
people's what we're talking about here
you know the Sumerians ancient
civilization of Sumeria 6,000 years ago
had its roots and them in the southern
part of Iraq Babylon is Iraq so we're
about to destroy not only a people live
warm breathing human beings of tender
ages mostly nor the most vulnerable but
we're going to remake and restructure an
ancient civilizations
symbols and heritage yes yes was the
freedom of information act any help at
all to you when you were investigating
the case and when you were writing your
books No
when it comes to the question was that
if you heard the question the question
was is the Freedom of Information Act
any help when we were doing research and
the answer was no freedom of information
that can be used in a number of matters
and it is possible to use it but when it
comes to very very sensitive cases and
issues like this it's not it's not a
huge falar as I'm I'm concerned yes from
from John Kennedy to Paul Wellstone we
all sort of know when a gut-level
who and what is behind all this do you
think it'll ever reach a critical mass
to the point where it all comes out and
and you know there's really an
investigation and the people who are
behind it are really taken to task
punished for it not absent a revolution
you know mr. Jefferson said you need a
revolution every 20 years you know and
when Jack Kennedy held a meeting in the
White House of all the Nobel Prize
winners they had had them all for dinner
one night he toasted them and he he well
fed and he said ladies and gentlemen
never before have so many brilliant
minds gathered at this table to dine
except for mr. Jefferson dined alone
Jefferson with all of the imperfections
that we all carry believed that you had
the cleanse a government and agents and
people in power every 20 years however
you have to do that well of course we
have not done that there's no sign that
we're going to do that power has
consolidated to a point in the United
States today where it's primary
behavioral characteristic is arrogance
and frankly those are the seeds of
destruction of any political system when
it gets to that point in time in my
lifetime the media the control of the
media has become so consolidated
it is it's that's not just frightening
it's it's something to lament because
there isn't a possibility of getting
free an active debate you know in this
this issue yes when you were a
journalist in Vietnam you mentioned the
photo the photographs were taken that
was the most televised war in history
there are two things that helped the
anti-war movement it was the most
televised war in history you have that
classic picture a little Vietnamese girl
naked running napalm and all the body
bags coming back yes yet during the
Persian Gulf War and afterwards with
almost a half million Iraqi children
dying after we blew up their
infrastructure and almost no body bags
coming back and our press had never
shown his pictures of the decimation of
Baghdad how do we we rally against a war
with no body bags and no televised
destruction of the civilian population
what I find very interesting is that
throughout the world today there is
building a movement an anti-war movement
of surprising strength with surprising
speed and and it's almost happening from
the roots of the soils of people who who
know instinctively now what this is all
about it's very difficult to engender
this kind of feeling in the United
States when the the drumbeats get louder
and louder continually throughout the
day
you know and it's a very difficult task
to overcome when you don't have
independent any independent media when
it transnational corporations control
them bottom lines are important to them
you know my first book was to have been
published by HarperCollins and they
wanted a chapter removed at the end of
the day everything was clear they wanted
one shot to removed and and it would
have made the killing a king just a
mafia killing I couldn't do that
some people still think it might have
been better to do it and then come back
with it later but I don't think so it
was too integrated the forces were to
integrate yes lady back there were you
asking a question oh yes in your opinion
did he know this was coming how worried
was he for his security I'm sorry can
you speak a little um in your opinion
how worried was Martin King for his
security and how much do you think he
knew that he was at risk and that this
might happen to him well I mean he your
honor how prepared he was or how and he
did a long years before the years before
he was almost killed many years before
when he was ahead doing a book signing
and in Harlem and a woman stabbed him
and the minute just by a fraction missed
an artery that would have killed he
would have died so he but he believed he
would be killed didn't know when it
would come but he believed he would he
would be killed not enough not enough
didn't take precautions about being
killed didn't take precautions about
wiretapping that was done all the time
because he said look I don't mind if
they know what they hear what we're
saying we're not doing anything illegal
let them hear and what we look at that
now and we say well how glorious naivete
that is because of course you're not
doing anything illegal but they
understand your strategy your movements
say everything about you this is the
enemy you're dealing with here all right
okay I don't know how much time they're
telling I don't have too much time huh
two more yes yeah I think after the
assassination of JFK he told Coretta
that he was going to be killed he always
knew he was gonna be killed somewhere
along one but it seemed while mostly as
if he had a special knowledge at that
time he was planning a treat at kiss
Emily with Thomas Merton many things it
was exhausted depressed but I think he
knew towards the end that this was going
to happen well I think the assassination
of Malcolm moved him more I think that
so I was I think a very sobering event
for him okay one more question is there
anyone who hasn't asked a question oh
yeah all right well let's yeah the
military unit the Pentagon where did all
that started was this an autonomous unit
somebody had to make the decisions and
for the the orders to go well what have
you learned about all right try to
understand this in 1967 a hundred cities
burned this country in autumn of 67 the
Pentagon was put under siege there two
hundred thousand people at the at the
Pentagon putting it literally under
siege someone told me that they had a
friend who was 180 and was one of the
military aides and he was up on the on
the parapet of the Pentagon on the day
of the demonstration and there was
McNamara and the chairman of the Joint
Chiefs now the chairman of Joint Chiefs
wasn't there McNamara was there the
chief of staff was there system chief of
staff for intelligence was there and
down the line came the question starting
with McNamara what do we do about this
they were terrified these were
barbarians at the gates and the chief of
staff shook his head and said I don't
know bill what we do about this and he
said
bill said just give me the go-ahead and
I'll take care of this problem and I
believe that there was a consensus that
Martin King had to go I I believe that
President the United States did not know
the details of it but I would be very
surprised if he didn't know that it was
going to happen because on the 31st of
March he announced four days before the
killing that he was not going to run
again so I I would have thought I would
have thought this was well known and I
would thought today that there's not
much doubt that people in the know in
this country understand what it is it's
being covered up and why it's being
covered up and particularly now it'll be
covered up more than ever because now
more than ever
government lacking credibility for
another war needs all the credibility
that it can get ok thank you for coming
back anyone is interested in the book an
active state we do have it please feel
free to come in and ask any more
questions we'll be right in this room
you can come this way that way whichever
way you like and the book is in the
front thanks a lot
William pepper is author of an act of
state the execution of Martin Luther
King it's published by verso on the web
at verso